critique Baldwin's unapologetic treatment of homosexuality and his refusal to confine his writing to "black" subjects resulted in the book's lukewarm reception. His insight that postwar America was haunted by the search for stable selves, however, was quite on point. Care of the self was, of course, a long-standing preoccupation of American culture but it had usually taken the form of tending to the soul. American religion was hardly less important in a postwar era that prominently featured Reinhold Niebuhr, Billy Graham, and Abraham Joshua Heschel. It was joined and sometimes intertwined with a new emphasis on the psyche. Many factors accounted for the


The book’s lukewarm reception owed much to Baldwin’s matter-of-fact handling of homosexuality and his refusal to confine his writing to “black” subjects. His insight that the quest for stable sense of identity constituted a central concern of American cultural life, however, was very much on point.[^2] Individuals had, of course, long pondered the question who they were, but, in light of Cold War era worries about the deleterious effects of an impersonal and bureaucratic society, the search for self assumed a special importance after the war. Much art and social science took as its subject efforts to find oneself in a society in which traditional attachments and relationships were attenuated or non-existent but which had no meaningful alternatives. Where once the paths to authentic and valid selfhood were understood to come about in the normal course of living, the transformation of and pitfalls within American life made attaining a coherent self that knew its capabilities and was capable of launching significant projects a problem, a task requiring special effort and for which there were few viable guidelines. Many social analysts worried that the failure to complete the task successfully left a large portion of the American people uprooted and anxious underneath an often placid exterior.

The worries were not simply cultural but political



[^2]: Technically speaking, self and identity demarcate entities. Self is a reflection on and reference by an individual to him or herself. Identity is the condition of having a unique existence. In philosophy, identity relates to sameness across time. In practice, however, the terms have demonstrated a good deal of slippage so that continuity of self---constant awareness of the continuity of oneself---is taken in much literature as proof of coherent identity. See Gerald Izenberg, _Identity: The Necessity of a Modern Idea_ (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016), 1-15.

The self in the postwar era was not only a cultural problem. It was also a political problem. A new form of analysis, one we might call psychosocial, achieved prominence in the middle third of the twentieth century, arguing in effect that political health depended on the psychic health of the populace. Such works as Erich Fromm’s _Escape From Freedom_ (1941), Theodor Adorno’s _Authoritarian Personality_ (1950), and Hannah Arendt’s _Origins of Totalitarianism_ (1951) attributed mass intolerance and antidemocratic movements to psychosocial disarray. Totalitarianism thus succeeded less by meeting material needs than by manipulating unfulfilled psychological ones. Although the ideologies of fascism and communism had little actual support, many commentators nonetheless worried that a society of anomic individuals who lacked internalized standards were fodder for poseurs and demagogues. That possibility no doubt fanned an interest in Tocqueville’s argument that democracy produced citizens who sought safety in a culture of stifling uniformity and were capable of massing against those who were distinctive.

 Contemporary psychology experiments seemed to confirm inclinations toward conformity. The work of both Solomon Asch (1956) and Stanley Milgram (1963) was much cited as warning signals that individuals lacked the psychological assuredness to resist a relentless majority. Asch demonstrated that college students would change their view of which of two lines was longest when others in the group disagreed. Milgram instructed study participants to apply electric shocks when “learners” seated in another room delivered wrong answers. Participants did not know that the “learners” were confederates or that the shocks were not actually administered. Despite initial reluctance, most participants continued to “shock” when ordered to do so by figures displaying symbols of authority (white lab coats, clipboard), even when the “learners” let out loud screams. There was, some observers concluded, a “Good German” and a torturer within all of us.[The pertinent studies are  @asch1951; @asch1956; and @milgram1963]

 In meeting the growing weight of expectations placed on the self, Americans increasingly looked to psychological discourse or therapy rather than religion or philosophy, as would have been the case in the past. Where once Americans examined the state of their souls, their postwar counterparts more often than not turned their attention to their mental and emotional makeup. Five times as many doctorates in psychology were awarded in the 1950s as the decade before. The number of psychiatrists increased ten fold from 1939 to 1959.[^4] Those numbers do not included pastoral counseling, which grew by leaps and bounds at midcentury. With numbers came a new prestige. Robert Linder’s _Fifty-Minute Hour_ (1955) and two of Alfred Hitchcock’s films _Vertigo_ (1958) and _Psycho_ (1960) were emblematic of the midcentury tendency to extol the psychiatrist as seer and depth psychology as the royal road to understanding motivation. Outside the consulting room, advice literature also echoed the concentration on the psychological. Rabbi Joshua Liebman’s best-selling _Peace of Mind_ (1946), which aspired to blend Talmudic wisdom with Freudian insight, and the immensely popular newspaper columns of actual sisters Abigail Van Buren and Ann Landers (both 1955) which were among the first to call upon the expertise of trained psychological professionals, were clear departures from older conduct-of-life literature.[^5]

 The importance of psychology to the effort to anchor the self made Sigmund Freud a crucial influence on American thought and culture. So prominent was he that the mass-market _Life_ magazine devoted a lengthy article to explaining his work and relevance to modern life.[^6] The Freudian unconscious was not, however, the only entry way Americans used to find themselves. For some, biology provided reassurance. Arguments that certain types of bodies bequeathed certain personalities were numerous. The search also appeared in wide-ranging debates over whether society was too much or too little present. For some, it pressed in so heavily that individuals could not achieve anything resembling authenticity. Others dissented, contending that the inability to connect with others was the cardinal condition of modern life. In many ways, the teenage years brought together both the somatic and social problems since that stage of life entailed both changing bodies and anxieties over popularity. Since the teenage years were also the time when individuals were, like Baldwin’s David, expected to find themselves, adolescence not surprisingly was the focus of intense interest and expectations. That adolescent selves (and by extension selves in general) found it extremely difficult to bear the burdens with which it was tasked only served to reinforce suspicions that the self was more fragile than it seemed.

 [^4]:	Andrew Scull, “The mental health sector and the social sciences in post-World War II USA. Part 1: Total war and its aftermath,” _History of Psychiatry_ 22(1) 2010: 14.

 [^5]:	On the prominence of psychological discourse, see Alan Petigny, _The Permissive Society: America, 1941-1965_ (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 15-99. *Life* Magazine recognized the new importance of psychology in 1957 with a five-part series. See Ernest Haveman, “Age of Psychology in the U.S.” _Life_ January 7, 1957, 68-82. Subsequent issues tackled psychological testing, the use of psychology in the workplace, psychoanalyses, and the future of psychology.

 [^6]:	The *Life* discussion of Freud in “The Age of Psychology” series appeared in the January 21, 1957 issue. Particularly rewarding on the influence of Freud after the war is John C. Burnham, _After Freud Left: A Century of Psychoanalysis in America_ (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2012), especially part II with essays by Dorothy Ross, Louis Menand, and Jean-Christophe Agnew.
