This is a fascinating set of discussions. Perceptive in many places. Introduced me to a whole new literature, which I hope to get to when my endless revisions are finished. I particularly liked the passages on the difference between social democracy and socialism, which Sanders -- perhaps for electoral reasons -- blurs. And, of course, I did note the Nordic detective fiction point and appreciated it.

Have to confess I haven't thought of some of these questions in awhile since it seemed to me that they were quite unlikely to matter in my lifetime. Consequently I am not as familiar with the literature as Jim and Lyle. So take my comments advisedly

My major concern is that there are really two essays in one. The first explores whether socialism can be democratic that is, can democracy be more than a gesture in socialist theory and whether American socialists are attuned to the problems of sustaining it in the socialist society that they want. This is the best part of your piece. You ask an important question and explore it in depth.

I would only add that I am less enamored of the Hayek quotation than you are because  it seems to me that it assumes what needs to be demonstrated, that socialism reduces in the end to Stalinism. It is, of course, more than fair to ask socialists why socialism won't become anti-democratic,

The second essay, which comes near the end, is an argument that property-owning democracy is a superior form of social organization because more democratic than democratic socialism (whatever that is). The portions is to my mind underdeveloped.  In one sense, of course, the discussion is conjectural since we have no more had the conditions of property-holding stakeholding than we have had collective ownership of the means of production. Nonetheless, we might weigh questions of sustainability. And in that regard, I had a number of questions that the text does not answer. What does property do in this property-owning democracy? Does it command as it does in the present-day economy the conditions of production? Does it entitle holders to all returns? Are the stock holdings alienable? Stock holding in what, exactly? Are there some additional safeguards in place to keep production among small, democratic units? Is there such a thing as workplace democracy (I know, there never has been)?

I assume all these questions have answers, but without them the second essay is a bit incomplete. One might wonder -- as Lyle did -- whether Brandeisian solutions dismantle concentration only to keep in place the large probability that the cycle of accumulation would proceed again and thus undercut the stake-holding on which a democratic society depends.

I guess I do not quite understand the ending. Why is Gude perceptive? The paragraph before you indicate hybrid resolutions are most likely. Wouldn't that mean we can have both Debs and Brandeis, at least in some forms? Especially if we want something of both (second sentence, last paragraph). I would add a little why even Debsians would want to start with Brandeis.

Lyle caught a number of the infelicities of expression. I would only add p. 13 there is a use of principle for principal. DSA, the principal (not principle) organization of contemporary American . . . Karen is the real editor of the family and will no doubt catch what I missed.

--D
