04 March 2019Notes on I Confess --

Villette blackmailing Logan for pre-ordination love affair. And victim of robbery. A set of coincidences

confession confidentiality -- In the case of confession the argument for preserving its absolute confidentiality is based on the conviction that it is a conversation about the deepest realities, including discreditable behaviour, of people’s lives, and is understood by the partners to include God as the major partner in the conversation. That is why disclosure, voluntary or forced, of what is confessed in that conversation has been seen as a gross violation of trust and of religious duty.

The clergy–penitent privilege, clergy privilege, confessional privilege, priest–penitent privilege, clergyman–communicant privilege, or ecclesiastical privilege is a rule of evidence that forbids judicial inquiry into certain communications (spoken or otherwise) between clergy and members of their congregation. The law recognises certain communication as privileged and not subject to otherwise obligatory disclosure; for example, this often applies to communications between lawyers and clients. In many jurisdictions certain communications between a member of the clergy of some or all religious faiths (e.g., a minister, priest, rabbi, imam) and a person consulting them in confidence are privileged in law. In particular, Catholics are required to confess sins to priests, who are unconditionally forbidden by Church canon law from making any disclosure, a position supported by the law of many countries, although in conflict with civil law in some jurisdictions.

The protection of the clergy–penitent privilege relationships rests on one of the more basic privileges as strong or stronger than the similar clauses to confidentiality between lawyer and client.

For Canada: To determine whether a communication is privileged, the "Wigmore Criteria" state that:

    The communications must originate in a confidence that they will not be disclosed.
    This element of confidentiality must be essential to the full and satisfactory maintenance of the relation between the parties.
    The relation must be one which in the opinion of the community ought to be sedulously fostered.
    The injury that would inure to the relation by the disclosure of the communication must be greater than the benefit thereby gained for the correct disposal of litigation.

From Truffaut - Hitchcock

1947 — “Civilization has become so protective that we’re no longer able to get our goose bumps instinctively. The only way to remove the numbness and revive our moral equilibrium is to use artificial means to bring about the shock. The best way to achieve that, it seems to me, is through a movie.” AH

matter of fact for documentary. “In the mystery and suspense genre, a tongue-in-cheek approach is indispensable. I feel that both _I Confess_ and _The Wrong Man_ suffer from a lack of humor. The only question then is whether one should always have a sense of humor in dealing with a serious subject.” Some have been too heavy handed. “but it’s the most difficult thing in the world to control that so as to get just the right dosage. It’s only after the picture’s done that one can judge that properly.”

Didn’t want Anne Baxter. FT: Clift “an air of total dignity at all times. . . only through his eyes that we sense his bewilderment at all the things that are happening to him. theme transference of guilt — by accepting confession as if accessory after the fact. FT: Public doesn’t realize this. hope Clift will speak up — can’t happen.

Problem — coincidence about Vilette —victim of crime from Keller, but perpetrator of blackmail. the situation is an extraordinary coincidence. And thus violates plausibility.

Hitchcock — Prots, agnostics, atheists can’t believe that Clift would remain silent at the risk of his own well being, even life. AH: We shouldn’t have made the picture.
 MC — always walking, moving forward. “concretizes the concept of his integrity..” Keller’s wife moves back and forth behind Clift to figure out what he plans to do — conversation innocuous. scene is actually between wife and MC. contrast between words and image — that is the key.

complicated by OK’s active attempt to frame confessor and benefactor.

key — tapestry details — lady eating apple.

cleared by court — yet remain under cloud of suspicion.

The film recalls his on-set spat during I Confess with Montgomery Clift over a split-second moment in which the actor was required to look up at a building as he crossed the street. The method actor who had trained with Lee Strasberg said he needed to consider whether his character, a guilt-ridden Roman Catholic priest, would look up at that moment. Hitchcock didn’t care what Clift thought: he needed him to look up at that precise moment or everything leading up to and from that glance would not make sense. Truffaut, when Hitchcock explains this to him, agrees: if Clift refused, he would have ruined the story arc. Happily, Clift ultimately glanced upwards and the scene makes sense.
